source/lib.rst, before:

.. _sec-lib:

Library
========

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 4

Since Cpu0 has not hardware float point instructions, it needs soft float point
library to finish the floating point operation. LLVM compiler-rt project include
software floating point library implementation :numref:`lib-empty` , so we choose it as the 
implementation. 

Since compiler-rt uses unix/linux rootfs structure, we fill the gap by add few
empty include-files in exlbt/include.

.. _lib-empty:
.. figure:: ../Fig/empty.png

  compiler-rt\/lib\/builtins' software float library
  
.. graphviz:: ../Fig/lib/lib.gv

.. table:: lldb dependences

  ==============  ========================== 
  functions       depend on
  ==============  ==========================
  scanf           newlib/libc
  printf          sanitizter_printf.c of compiler-rt
  ==============  ==========================

.. table:: sanitizer_printf.c of compiler-rt dependences

  ====================  ========================== 
  functions             depend on
  ====================  ==========================
  sanitizter_printf.c   builtins of compiler-rt
  ====================  ==========================


C Library (Newlib)
------------------

Newlib is a C library for bare metal platform.
Two libraries in newlib are libc and libm. Libc is for functions of
IO, file and string supported while libm is for mathematical functions.
Web of newlib is here [#newlib]_ and newlib/libm here [#newlib-libm]_ .
Since the next section compiler-rt/builtins depends on libm, please running
the following bash script is for installing and building newlib for
Cpu0.

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/newlib-cpu0.sh
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/newlib-cpu0.sh

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/newlib.patch
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/newlib.patch

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/newlib-cygwin/newlib/libc/machine/cpu0/setjmp.S
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/newlib-cygwin/newlib/libc/machine/cpu0/setjmp.S

.. code-block:: console

  cschen@cschendeiMac exlbt % bash newlib-cpu0.sh

The libm.a depends on variable errno of libc defined in sys/errno.h.

- libgloss is BSP [#libgloss-bsp]_

Compiler-rt's builtins
----------------------

Compiler-rt is a project with runtime libraries implentation [#compiler-rt]_ .
Compiler-rt/lib/builtins provides functions for basic operations such as +, -, 
\*, /, ... on type of float or double and for conversion between float and 
integer, or on type of over 32-bit. The compiler-rt/lib/builtins/README.txt 
[#builtins-README]_ includes the dependent functions that the whole builtins 
called.
The dependent functions is a small part of libm listed in 
compier-rt/lib/builtins/int_math.h [#builtins-int_math]_ .

.. table:: compiler-rt builtins dependences on newlib/libm (open source libc for bare metal) 

  ==============  ========================== 
  library         functions
  ==============  ==========================
  ported already  abort
  libm/common     finite, isinf, isnan
  libm/complex    cabs
  libm/math       copysign, fcabs, fmax, log, scalbn
  libm/mathfp     cabs
  ==============  ==========================

- fabs (may includes fabsf, fabsl).

- Only type of complex need above, others (float and double) depend on abort() 
  only which I ported in lbt/exlbt/compiler-rt/cpu0/abort.c.

- All test cases in compiler-rt/test/builtins/Unit depend on 
  printf(%lld or %llX, ...), I ported from 
  compiler-rt/lib/sanitizer_common/sanitizer_printf.cpp to 
  lbt/exlbt/input/sanitizer_printf.cpp.

- These dependent functions from has bee ported from newlib/libm.

- Except builtins, the other three, sanitizer runtimes, profile and BlocksRuntime, 
  are not needed for my embedded Cpu0.

The libgcc's Integer plus Soft float library  [#lib-gcc]_ [#int-lib]_ 
[#sw-float-lib]_ are equal to functions of compiler-rt's builtins.

Though the 'rt' means RunTime libaraies, in builtins library, 
most of these functions 
written in target-independent C form and can be compiled and static-linked
into target. When you compile the following c code, llc generates 
**jsub __addsf3** to call compiler-rt float function since Cpu0 hasn't hardware
float-instructions so Cpu0 backend doesn't handle it, and llvm treats it
as a function call for float-add instruction.

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/input/ch_call_compilerrt_func.c
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/ch_call_compilerrt_func.c

.. code-block:: console

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % clang -target mips-unknown-linux-gnu -S 
  ch_call_compilerrt_func.c -emit-llvm
  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % cat ch_call_compilerrt_func.ll
    ...
    %4 = load float, float* %1, align 4
    %5 = load float, float* %2, align 4
    %6 = fadd float %4, %5

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % ~/llvm/test/build/bin/llc -march=cpu0 
  -mcpu=cpu032II -relocation-model=static -filetype=asm ch_call_compilerrt_func.ll -o -
	...
	ld	$4, 20($fp)
	ld	$5, 16($fp)
	jsub	__addsf3


For some brar-metal or embedded application, the C code doesn't need the
file and high-level IO in libc.
Libm provides a lots of functions to support software floating point beyond
basic operations [#math]_ .
Libc provides file, high-level IO functions and basic float functions [#clib]_ .

Cpu0 hires Compiler-rt/lib/builtins and 
compiler-rt/lib/sanitizer_common/sanitizer_printf.cpp at this point.
The compiler-rt/lib/builtins is a 
target-independent C form of software float library implementation. Cpu0 
implements compiler-rt-12.x/cpu0/abort.c only at this point for supporting 
this feature.

.. note:: **Why these libm functions called builtins in compiler-rt/lib/builtins?**

  Though these compiler-rt builtins functions are written in C. The CPU can
  provide float type instructions or high level instructions to compile these
  libm function calls into specific HW instructions to speed up.

In order to speed up these libm functions, many CPU provide float instructions
for them. Of course, for the implemenation, clang compiles these float type's
operation in C into llvm ir, then Mips backends compiles them into their 
HW instructions. For example:

- float a, b, c; a=b*c; -> (clang) -> %add = fmul float %0, %1 [#llvm-fmul]_

Mips backend compiles `fmul` into HW instructions as follows,

- %add = fmul float %0, %1 -> (llvm-mips) -> mul.s [#llvm-fmul]_ [#mips-fmadd1.ll]_

Cpu0 backend compiles `fmul` into libm function call fmul as follows,

- %add = fmul float %0, %1 -> (llvm-mips) -> jsub fmul [#llvm-fmul]_

For high level of math functions, clang compiles these float type's
operation in C into llvm intrinsic functions, then the llvm backends of these
CPU compile them into their HW instructions. For example, clang compiles pow()
into @llvm.pow.f32 as follows,

- %pow = call float @llvm.pow.f32(float %x, float %y) [#clang-pow]_

AMDGPU compiles @llvm.pow.f32 into a few instructions as follows:

- %pow = call float @llvm.pow.f32(float %x, float %y) (llvm-AMDGPU) -> ... + v_exp_f32_e32 v0, v0 + ... [#clang-pow]_

Mips compiles @llvm.pow.f32 into a few instructions as follows:

- %pow = call float @llvm.pow.f32(float %x, float %y) (llvm-AMDGPU) -> jal powf [#clang-pow]_


Clang treats these libm functions as builtin and compiles them into llvm ir or 
intrinsic, then different backends can choose to compile them into specific 
instructions or call builtin functions in libm. The following is Clang's 
comment [#clang-builtin-comment]_.

.. code-block:: c++

  RValue CodeGenFunction::EmitBuiltinExpr(...)
    ...
    // There are LLVM math intrinsics/instructions corresponding to math library 
    // functions except the LLVM op will never set errno while the math library
    // might. Also, math builtins have the same semantics as their math library
    // twins. Thus, we can transform math library and builtin calls to their
    // LLVM counterparts if the call is marked 'const' (known to never set errno).


Software Float Point Support
-----------------------------

The following sanitizer_printf.cpp extended from compiler-rt can support 
printf("%lld"). It's implementation calling some floating lib functions
in compiler-rt/lib/builtins.

.. rubric:: exlbt/include/math.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/include/math.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/include/stdio.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/include/stdio.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/include/stdlib.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/include/stdlib.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/include/string.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/include/string.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/compiler-rt/cpu0/abort.c
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/compiler-rt/cpu0/abort.c

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/sanitizer_internal_defs.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/sanitizer_internal_defs.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/sanitizer_printf.cpp
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/sanitizer_printf.cpp


Above two sanitizer_*.* files are ported from compiler-rt and I add code to
support left-justify for number-printf and right-justify for string-printf.
The following ch_float.cpp test the float lib.

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/compiler-rt-12.x/builtins/Makefile
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/compiler-rt-12.x/builtins/Makefile

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/ch_float.cpp
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/ch_float.cpp
    :start-after: /// start

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/Makefile.float
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/Makefile.float


.. code-block:: console

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % bash make.sh cpu032II eb Makefile.float
  ...
  endian =  BigEndian
  ISR address:00020614
  0   /* 0: big endian, 1: little endian */

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air verilog % iverilog -o cpu0IIs cpu0IIs.v 
  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air verilog % ./cpu0IIs
  ...

  a: 100000007FFFFFFF, 100000007fffffff, 1152921506754330623
  b: 10000000, 268435456
  b: 10000000, 268435456
  Hello world!
  printf test
  <null> is null pointer
  5 = 5
  -2147483647 = - max int
  char a = 'a'
  hex ff = ff
  hex 00 = 00
  signed -3 = unsigned 4294967293 = hex fffffffd
  0 message(s)
  0 message(s) with %
  justif: "left      "
  justif: "     right"
   3: 0003 zero padded
   3: 3    left justif.
   3:    3 right justif.
  -3: -003 zero padded
  -3: -3   left justif.
  -3:   -3 right justif.
  test_longlong_shift1() = 289
  test_longlong_shift2() = 22
  test_shift_left<long long>(0x12, 4LL) = 288
  test_shift_right<long long>(0x001666660000000a, 48LL) = 22
  test_shift_right<unsigned long long>(0x001666660000000a, 48LLu) = 22
  (int)test_add<float, float, float>(-2.2, 3.3) = 1
  (int)test_mul<float, float, float>(-2.2, 3.3) = -7
  (int)test_div<float, float, float>(-1.8, 0.5) = -3
  (int)test_add<double, double, float>(-2.2, 3.3) = 1
  (int)test_add<double, float, double>(-2.2, 3.3) = 1
  (int)test_add<float, float, double>(-2.2, 3.3) = 1
  (int)test_mul<double, float, double>(-2.2, 3.3) = -7
  (int)test_mul<float, float, double>(-2.2, 3.3) = -7
  (int)test_div<double, double, double>(-1.8, 0.5) = -3
  test_div<long long, long long, long long>(-10LL, 4LL) = -2
  ...             
  RET to PC < 0, finished!


The exlbt/input/compiler-rt-test/builtins/Unit copied from 
compiler-rt/test/builtins/Unit as follows,

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/ch_builtins.cpp
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/ch_builtins.cpp

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/Makefile.builtins
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/Makefile.builtins

Run as follows,

.. code-block:: console

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % bash make.sh cpu032II eb Makefile.builtins
  ...
  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air verilog % ./cpu0IIs
  ...
  absvdi2_test(): PASS!
  absvsi2_test(): PASS!
  absvti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  adddf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  addsf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  addvdi3_test(): PASS!
  addvsi3_test(): PASS!
  addvti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  ashldi3_test(): PASS!
  ashlti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  ashrdi3_test(): PASS!
  ashrti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  bswapdi2_test(): PASS!
  bswapsi2_test(): PASS!
  clzdi2_test(): PASS!
  clzsi2_test(): PASS!
  clzti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  cmpdi2_test(): PASS!
  cmpti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  comparedf2_test(): PASS!
  comparesf2_test(): PASS!
  cpu_model_test(): SKIPPED!
  ctzdi2_test(): PASS!
  ctzsi2_test(): PASS!
  ctzti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  divdc3_test(): PASS!
  divdf3_test(): PASS!
  divdf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  divdi3_test(): PASS!
  divmodsi4_test(): PASS!
  divmodti4_test(): SKIPPED!
  divsf3_test(): PASS!
  divsf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  divsi3_test(): PASS!
  divtc3_test(): PASS!
  divtf3_test(): SKIPPED!
  divti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  divxc3_test(): PASS!
  eqdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  eqsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  eqtf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  extenddftf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  extendhfsf2_test(): PASS!
  extendhftf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  extendsfdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  extendsftf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  gedf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  gesf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  getf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  gtdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  gtsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  gttf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  ledf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  lesf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  letf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  lshrdi3_test(): PASS!
  lshrti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  ltdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  ltsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  lttf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  moddi3_test(): PASS!
  modsi3_test(): PASS!
  modti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  muldc3_test(): PASS!
  muldf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  muldi3_test(): PASS!
  mulodi4_test(): PASS!
  mulosi4_test(): PASS!
  muloti4_test(): SKIPPED!
  mulsc3_test(): PASS!
  mulsf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  multc3_test(): SKIPPED!
  multf3_test(): SKIPPED!
  multi3_test(): SKIPPED!
  mulvdi3_test(): PASS!
  mulvsi3_test(): PASS!
  mulvti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  mulxc3_test(): PASS!
  nedf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  negdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  negdi2_test(): PASS!
  negsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  negti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  negvdi2_test(): PASS!
  negvsi2_test(): PASS!
  negvti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  nesf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  netf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  subdf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  subsf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  subtf3_test(): SKIPPED!
  subvdi3_test(): PASS!
  subvsi3_test(): PASS!
  subvti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  trampoline_setup_test(): SKIPPED!
  truncdfhf2_test(): PASS!
  truncdfsf2_test(): PASS!
  truncdfsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  truncsfhf2_test(): PASS!
  trunctfdf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  trunctfhf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  trunctfsf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  ucmpdi2_test(): PASS!
  ucmpti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  udivdi3_test(): PASS!
  udivmoddi4_test(): PASS!
  udivmodsi4_test(): PASS!
  udivmodti4_test(): SKIPPED!
  udivsi3_test(): PASS!
  udivti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  umoddi3_test(): PASS!
  umodsi3_test(): PASS!
  umodti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  unorddf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  unordsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  unordtf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  ...          
  RET to PC < 0, finished!


.. [#newlib] https://sourceware.org/newlib/

.. [#newlib-libm] https://sourceware.org/newlib/libm.html

.. [#libgloss-bsp] https://www.embecosm.com/appnotes/ean9/html/ch03s01.html

.. [#compiler-rt] http://compiler-rt.llvm.org/

.. [#builtins-README] https://github.com/llvm-mirror/compiler-rt/blob/master/lib/builtins/README.txt

.. [#builtins-int_math] https://github.com/microsoft/compiler-rt/blob/master/lib/builtins/int_math.h

.. [#lib-gcc] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Libgcc.html

.. [#int-lib] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Integer-library-routines.html#Integer-library-routines

.. [#sw-float-lib] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Soft-float-library-routines.html#Soft-float-library-routines

.. [#math] https://www.programiz.com/c-programming/library-function/math.h

.. [#clib] https://www.cplusplus.com/reference/clibrary

.. [#mips-fmadd1.ll] https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/test/CodeGen/Mips/fmadd1.ll

.. [#llvm-fmul] Reference https://github.com/Jonathan2251/lbd/tree/master/lbdex/input/ch7_1_fmul.c

.. [#clang-pow] Reference https://github.com/Jonathan2251/lbt/tree/master/exlbt/input/test_pow.c

.. [#clang-builtin-comment] https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/lib/CodeGen/CGBuiltin.cpp

Commit message:

Add caption for reference of .gv

source/lib.rst, after:

.. _sec-lib:

Library
========

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 4

Since Cpu0 has not hardware float point instructions, it needs software float 
point library to finish the floating point operation. 
LLVM compiler-rt project has software floating point library implementation 
:numref:`swf-lib` , so I choose it as the implementation. 

Since compiler-rt uses unix/linux rootfs structure, we fill the gap by add few
empty include-files in exlbt/include.

.. _swf-lib:
.. graphviz:: ../Fig/lib/lib.gv
  :caption: compiler-rt\/lib\/builtins' software float library
  

.. table:: lldb dependences

  ==============  ========================== 
  functions       depend on
  ==============  ==========================
  scanf           newlib/libc
  printf          sanitizter_printf.c of compiler-rt
  ==============  ==========================

.. table:: sanitizer_printf.c of compiler-rt dependences

  ====================  ========================== 
  functions             depend on
  ====================  ==========================
  sanitizter_printf.c   builtins of compiler-rt
  ====================  ==========================


C Library (Newlib)
------------------

Newlib is a C library for bare metal platform.
Two libraries in newlib are libc and libm. Libc is for functions of
IO, file and string supported while libm is for mathematical functions.
Web of newlib is here [#newlib]_ and newlib/libm here [#newlib-libm]_ .
Since the next section compiler-rt/builtins depends on libm, please run
the following bash script to install and build newlib for Cpu0.

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/newlib-cpu0.sh
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/newlib-cpu0.sh

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/newlib.patch
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/newlib.patch

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/newlib-cygwin/newlib/libc/machine/cpu0/setjmp.S
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/newlib-cygwin/newlib/libc/machine/cpu0/setjmp.S

.. code-block:: console

  cschen@cschendeiMac exlbt % bash newlib-cpu0.sh

The libm.a depends on variable errno of libc defined in sys/errno.h.

- libgloss is BSP [#libgloss-bsp]_

Compiler-rt's builtins
----------------------

Compiler-rt is a project for runtime libraries implentation [#compiler-rt]_ .
Compiler-rt/lib/builtins provides functions for basic operations such as +, -, 
\*, /, ... on type of float or double and for conversion between float and 
integer, or other type of more than 32-bit, such as `long long`. 
The compiler-rt/lib/builtins/README.txt 
[#builtins-README]_ includes the dependent functions that the whole builtins 
called.
The dependent functions is a small part of libm listed in 
compier-rt/lib/builtins/int_math.h [#builtins-int_math]_ .

.. table:: compiler-rt builtins dependences on newlib/libm (open source libc for bare metal) 

  ==============  ========================== 
  library         functions
  ==============  ==========================
  ported already  abort
  libm/common     finite, isinf, isnan
  libm/complex    cabs
  libm/math       copysign, fcabs, fmax, log, scalbn
  libm/mathfp     cabs
  ==============  ==========================

- fabs (may includes fabsf, fabsl).

- Only type of complex need above, others (float and double) depend on abort() 
  only which I ported in lbt/exlbt/compiler-rt/cpu0/abort.c.

- All test cases in compiler-rt/test/builtins/Unit depend on 
  printf(%lld or %llX, ...), I ported from 
  compiler-rt/lib/sanitizer_common/sanitizer_printf.cpp to 
  lbt/exlbt/input/sanitizer_printf.cpp.

- These dependent functions from has bee ported from newlib/libm.

- Except builtins, the other three, sanitizer runtimes, profile and BlocksRuntime, 
  are not needed for my embedded Cpu0.

The libgcc's Integer plus Soft float library  [#lib-gcc]_ [#int-lib]_ 
[#sw-float-lib]_ are equal to functions of compiler-rt's builtins.

Though the 'rt' means RunTime libaraies, in builtins library, 
most of these functions 
written in target-independent C form and can be compiled and static-linked
into target. When you compile the following c code, llc will generate 
**jsub __addsf3** to call compiler-rt float function for Cpu0.
This is because Cpu0 hasn't hardware float-instructions, so Cpu0 backend 
doesn't handle the DAG of __addsf3. The end result, llvm treats the DAG of 
__addsf3 as a function call for float-add instruction.

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/input/ch_call_compilerrt_func.c
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/ch_call_compilerrt_func.c

.. code-block:: console

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % clang -target mips-unknown-linux-gnu -S 
  ch_call_compilerrt_func.c -emit-llvm
  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % cat ch_call_compilerrt_func.ll
    ...
    %4 = load float, float* %1, align 4
    %5 = load float, float* %2, align 4
    %6 = fadd float %4, %5

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % ~/llvm/test/build/bin/llc -march=cpu0 
  -mcpu=cpu032II -relocation-model=static -filetype=asm ch_call_compilerrt_func.ll -o -
	...
	ld	$4, 20($fp)
	ld	$5, 16($fp)
	jsub	__addsf3


For some brar-metal or embedded application, the C code doesn't need the
file and high-level IO in libc.
Libm provides a lots of functions to support software floating point beyond
basic operations [#math]_ .
Libc provides file, high-level IO functions and basic float functions [#clib]_ .

Cpu0 hires Compiler-rt/lib/builtins and 
compiler-rt/lib/sanitizer_common/sanitizer_printf.cpp at this point.
The compiler-rt/lib/builtins is a 
target-independent C form of software float library implementation. Cpu0 
implements compiler-rt-12.x/cpu0/abort.c only at this point for supporting 
this feature.

.. note:: **Why these libm functions called builtins in compiler-rt/lib/builtins?**

  Though these compiler-rt builtins functions are written in C. The CPU can
  provide float type instructions or high level instructions to compile these
  libm function calls into specific HW instructions to speed up.

In order to speed up these libm functions, many CPU provide float instructions
for them. Of course, for the implemenation, clang compiles these float type's
operation in C into llvm ir, then Mips backends compiles them into their 
HW instructions. For example:

- float a, b, c; a=b*c; -> (clang) -> %add = fmul float %0, %1 [#llvm-fmul]_

Mips backend compiles `fmul` into HW instructions as follows,

- %add = fmul float %0, %1 -> (llvm-mips) -> mul.s [#llvm-fmul]_ [#mips-fmadd1.ll]_

Cpu0 backend compiles `fmul` into libm function call fmul as follows,

- %add = fmul float %0, %1 -> (llvm-mips) -> jsub fmul [#llvm-fmul]_

For high level of math functions, clang compiles these float type's
operation in C into llvm intrinsic functions, then the llvm backends of these
CPU compile them into their HW instructions. For example, clang compiles pow()
into @llvm.pow.f32 as follows,

- %pow = call float @llvm.pow.f32(float %x, float %y) [#clang-pow]_

AMDGPU compiles @llvm.pow.f32 into a few instructions as follows:

- %pow = call float @llvm.pow.f32(float %x, float %y) (llvm-AMDGPU) -> ... + v_exp_f32_e32 v0, v0 + ... [#clang-pow]_

Mips compiles @llvm.pow.f32 into a few instructions as follows:

- %pow = call float @llvm.pow.f32(float %x, float %y) (llvm-AMDGPU) -> jal powf [#clang-pow]_


Clang treats these libm functions as builtin and compiles them into llvm ir or 
intrinsic, then different backends can choose to compile them into specific 
instructions or call builtin functions in libm. The following is Clang's 
comment [#clang-builtin-comment]_.

.. code-block:: c++

  RValue CodeGenFunction::EmitBuiltinExpr(...)
    ...
    // There are LLVM math intrinsics/instructions corresponding to math library 
    // functions except the LLVM op will never set errno while the math library
    // might. Also, math builtins have the same semantics as their math library
    // twins. Thus, we can transform math library and builtin calls to their
    // LLVM counterparts if the call is marked 'const' (known to never set errno).


Software Float Point Support
-----------------------------

The following sanitizer_printf.cpp extended from compiler-rt can support 
printf("%lld"). It's implementation calling some floating lib functions
in compiler-rt/lib/builtins.

.. rubric:: exlbt/include/math.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/include/math.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/include/stdio.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/include/stdio.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/include/stdlib.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/include/stdlib.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/include/string.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/include/string.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/compiler-rt/cpu0/abort.c
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/compiler-rt/cpu0/abort.c

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/sanitizer_internal_defs.h
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/sanitizer_internal_defs.h

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/sanitizer_printf.cpp
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/sanitizer_printf.cpp


Above two sanitizer_*.* files are ported from compiler-rt and I add code to
support left-justify for number-printf and right-justify for string-printf.
The following ch_float.cpp test the float lib.

.. rubric:: lbt/exlbt/compiler-rt-12.x/builtins/Makefile
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/compiler-rt-12.x/builtins/Makefile

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/ch_float.cpp
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/ch_float.cpp
    :start-after: /// start

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/Makefile.float
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/Makefile.float


.. code-block:: console

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % bash make.sh cpu032II eb Makefile.float
  ...
  endian =  BigEndian
  ISR address:00020614
  0   /* 0: big endian, 1: little endian */

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air verilog % iverilog -o cpu0IIs cpu0IIs.v 
  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air verilog % ./cpu0IIs
  ...

  a: 100000007FFFFFFF, 100000007fffffff, 1152921506754330623
  b: 10000000, 268435456
  b: 10000000, 268435456
  Hello world!
  printf test
  <null> is null pointer
  5 = 5
  -2147483647 = - max int
  char a = 'a'
  hex ff = ff
  hex 00 = 00
  signed -3 = unsigned 4294967293 = hex fffffffd
  0 message(s)
  0 message(s) with %
  justif: "left      "
  justif: "     right"
   3: 0003 zero padded
   3: 3    left justif.
   3:    3 right justif.
  -3: -003 zero padded
  -3: -3   left justif.
  -3:   -3 right justif.
  test_longlong_shift1() = 289
  test_longlong_shift2() = 22
  test_shift_left<long long>(0x12, 4LL) = 288
  test_shift_right<long long>(0x001666660000000a, 48LL) = 22
  test_shift_right<unsigned long long>(0x001666660000000a, 48LLu) = 22
  (int)test_add<float, float, float>(-2.2, 3.3) = 1
  (int)test_mul<float, float, float>(-2.2, 3.3) = -7
  (int)test_div<float, float, float>(-1.8, 0.5) = -3
  (int)test_add<double, double, float>(-2.2, 3.3) = 1
  (int)test_add<double, float, double>(-2.2, 3.3) = 1
  (int)test_add<float, float, double>(-2.2, 3.3) = 1
  (int)test_mul<double, float, double>(-2.2, 3.3) = -7
  (int)test_mul<float, float, double>(-2.2, 3.3) = -7
  (int)test_div<double, double, double>(-1.8, 0.5) = -3
  test_div<long long, long long, long long>(-10LL, 4LL) = -2
  ...             
  RET to PC < 0, finished!


The exlbt/input/compiler-rt-test/builtins/Unit copied from 
compiler-rt/test/builtins/Unit as follows,

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/ch_builtins.cpp
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/ch_builtins.cpp

.. rubric:: exlbt/input/Makefile.builtins
.. literalinclude:: ../exlbt/input/Makefile.builtins

Run as follows,

.. code-block:: console

  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air input % bash make.sh cpu032II eb Makefile.builtins
  ...
  chungshu@ChungShudeMacBook-Air verilog % ./cpu0IIs
  ...
  absvdi2_test(): PASS!
  absvsi2_test(): PASS!
  absvti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  adddf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  addsf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  addvdi3_test(): PASS!
  addvsi3_test(): PASS!
  addvti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  ashldi3_test(): PASS!
  ashlti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  ashrdi3_test(): PASS!
  ashrti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  bswapdi2_test(): PASS!
  bswapsi2_test(): PASS!
  clzdi2_test(): PASS!
  clzsi2_test(): PASS!
  clzti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  cmpdi2_test(): PASS!
  cmpti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  comparedf2_test(): PASS!
  comparesf2_test(): PASS!
  cpu_model_test(): SKIPPED!
  ctzdi2_test(): PASS!
  ctzsi2_test(): PASS!
  ctzti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  divdc3_test(): PASS!
  divdf3_test(): PASS!
  divdf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  divdi3_test(): PASS!
  divmodsi4_test(): PASS!
  divmodti4_test(): SKIPPED!
  divsf3_test(): PASS!
  divsf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  divsi3_test(): PASS!
  divtc3_test(): PASS!
  divtf3_test(): SKIPPED!
  divti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  divxc3_test(): PASS!
  eqdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  eqsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  eqtf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  extenddftf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  extendhfsf2_test(): PASS!
  extendhftf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  extendsfdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  extendsftf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  gedf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  gesf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  getf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  gtdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  gtsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  gttf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  ledf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  lesf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  letf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  lshrdi3_test(): PASS!
  lshrti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  ltdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  ltsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  lttf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  moddi3_test(): PASS!
  modsi3_test(): PASS!
  modti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  muldc3_test(): PASS!
  muldf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  muldi3_test(): PASS!
  mulodi4_test(): PASS!
  mulosi4_test(): PASS!
  muloti4_test(): SKIPPED!
  mulsc3_test(): PASS!
  mulsf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  multc3_test(): SKIPPED!
  multf3_test(): SKIPPED!
  multi3_test(): SKIPPED!
  mulvdi3_test(): PASS!
  mulvsi3_test(): PASS!
  mulvti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  mulxc3_test(): PASS!
  nedf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  negdf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  negdi2_test(): PASS!
  negsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  negti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  negvdi2_test(): PASS!
  negvsi2_test(): PASS!
  negvti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  nesf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  netf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  subdf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  subsf3vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  subtf3_test(): SKIPPED!
  subvdi3_test(): PASS!
  subvsi3_test(): PASS!
  subvti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  trampoline_setup_test(): SKIPPED!
  truncdfhf2_test(): PASS!
  truncdfsf2_test(): PASS!
  truncdfsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  truncsfhf2_test(): PASS!
  trunctfdf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  trunctfhf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  trunctfsf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  ucmpdi2_test(): PASS!
  ucmpti2_test(): SKIPPED!
  udivdi3_test(): PASS!
  udivmoddi4_test(): PASS!
  udivmodsi4_test(): PASS!
  udivmodti4_test(): SKIPPED!
  udivsi3_test(): PASS!
  udivti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  umoddi3_test(): PASS!
  umodsi3_test(): PASS!
  umodti3_test(): SKIPPED!
  unorddf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  unordsf2vfp_test(): SKIPPED!
  unordtf2_test(): SKIPPED!
  ...          
  RET to PC < 0, finished!


.. [#newlib] https://sourceware.org/newlib/

.. [#newlib-libm] https://sourceware.org/newlib/libm.html

.. [#libgloss-bsp] https://www.embecosm.com/appnotes/ean9/html/ch03s01.html

.. [#compiler-rt] http://compiler-rt.llvm.org/

.. [#builtins-README] https://github.com/llvm-mirror/compiler-rt/blob/master/lib/builtins/README.txt

.. [#builtins-int_math] https://github.com/microsoft/compiler-rt/blob/master/lib/builtins/int_math.h

.. [#lib-gcc] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Libgcc.html

.. [#int-lib] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Integer-library-routines.html#Integer-library-routines

.. [#sw-float-lib] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Soft-float-library-routines.html#Soft-float-library-routines

.. [#math] https://www.programiz.com/c-programming/library-function/math.h

.. [#clib] https://www.cplusplus.com/reference/clibrary

.. [#mips-fmadd1.ll] https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/test/CodeGen/Mips/fmadd1.ll

.. [#llvm-fmul] Reference https://github.com/Jonathan2251/lbd/tree/master/lbdex/input/ch7_1_fmul.c

.. [#clang-pow] Reference https://github.com/Jonathan2251/lbt/tree/master/exlbt/input/test_pow.c

.. [#clang-builtin-comment] https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/lib/CodeGen/CGBuiltin.cpp
